---
layout: post
title: KAPEX
permalink: /kapex
categories: Fieldwork
---

The Kalahari Atmospheric Processes Experiment (KAPEx) [website](www.kapex2024.com) describes the project aims.

Heating over the Kalahari Desert creates an atmospheric furnace affecting winds and rainfall for thousands of kilometres. What goes on inside the furnace is a mystery. We have few observations and no way ensuring our future projections of warming are on track. KAPEX is a mission into the 40-degree heart of the cauldron to observe the dynamics of the Kalahari atmosphere. The observations are crucial to understanding the rapid warming and projected future delayed rainfall onset, which affects millions of lives.

The central region of rapid warming over southern Africa occurs inside an atmospheric feature known as the Kalahari Heat Low. The Kalahari Heat Low is a low-pressure system, driven by strong surface heating over the desert surface. The low-pressure over the desert creates strong pressure gradients and affects the atmospheric structure aloft, altering patterns of winds over thousands of kilometres: from Congo to Cape Town. The heat low plays a central role in rainfall across the subcontinent, including the sharp east-west gradient in rainfall, which demarcates wetter subtropical regions and the arid Kalahari and Namib deserts.

The project addresses a large gap in climate observations over Africa. While intensive observational campaigns in the Sahara have led to fundamental insights into regional climate in the north of the continent, there has been no such campaign for the Kalahari – Africa’s second largest desert. Six-hourly radiosonde releases will enable measurement of the atmospheric circulation in unprecedented detail.
